---
title:  Dotfiles for Greenhorns
classes: wide
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

If I could go back in time and tell my younger self a few things that would help me be a better
software developer, it would probably be:

* read the source, luke.
* read papers.
* create and maintain a dotfiles repo.

The first two now seem obvious. Reading the code of the projects you
use gives you insight that you can't get from reading the documentation. Reading papers like Amazon
Dynamo fits the same bill and in that case, allows you to more fearlessly operate datastores. I
often avoided doing both because it seemed hard, and like anything new it _is_ hard until
you've done it a bit and it becomes more natural.

The third entry, a dotfiles repo, is probably a little less obvious. But I really love my dotfiles
repo. Dotfiles are a force multiplier for me. If you don't have or use one, maybe I can
convince you why you should.

# what is a dotfiles repo?

A dotfiles repo is one that defines your terminal shell experience. This includes scripts to install
and configure utilities you use frequently (e.g. [ripgrep](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep/),
[homebrew](https://brew.sh/), [neovim](https://github.com/neovim/neovim),
[tmux](https://github.com/tmux/tmux/wiki), [git](https://git-scm.com/), etc). It also is a nice
home to your shell configuration (e.g. configuring [ohmyzsh](https://ohmyz.sh/)). Dotfiles are also
where the random bash scripts you write live. Do you install systemd or launchd agents? They can
live here too.

While these things are nice, the real power comes from the fact that all of this configuration is
version controlled. I very frequently find that engineers will simply start fresh when they get a
new job or a new laptop, and add the programs they need as the need arises. While this is wildly
inefficient, it's insidious in another way:

> because machines are treated as ephemeral, the investment to customize them is not made.

This means that you are always using a particular tool as it comes out of the box. Which... is
certainly fine. However, if you're looking to increase your own power as a developer, you will want to
configure these to bend to your will. And here's the great thing:

> a dotfiles lets you make tiny changes easily.

You don't really need to configure _everything_ about a particular tool. But if you set up your
dotfiles to allow you to easily change the configuration, then you've just removed a huge mental
roadblock. You know exactly where to make the change and you commit it. It's there
forever and you will never be without that adjustment unless you will it to be so. Over time, these
adjustments will grow and eventually someone will call you a wizard because it looks like
magic watching you control your machine.

Hopefully I've convinced you. Let's chat about how to create a dotfiles repo and get in the flow of
using it. After that I'll show you some of the things I like best about mine.

# create your own dotfiles

Creating a dotfiles is easy. There are many dotfiles frameworks like
[chezmoi](https://github.com/twpayne/chezmoi) that have an opinionated structure and rythym. These
frameworks are great for what they do, but frameworks in general tend to make easy things easier,
and more nuanced things much more difficult as you try to bend the framework to your will for use
cases that were not originally envisioned.

Since many of them are simply bash scripts under the hood, here's what I suggest:

> create your own dotfiles repo using shell scripts

I know... 😱 but trust me. The level of scripting that we are going to do is very basic. And having
some base level of proficiency with the lingua franca of computing has a huge return on investment.
Maintaining your dotfiles will improve your shell scripting proficiency, and
you'll find that you'll start writing one-off helpers in bash/zsh more often that will... live in
your dotfiles!

So let's just do it then.

```sh
cd ~
mkdir .dotfiles
cd .dotfiles
git init
echo 'echo "Starting .dotfiles install"' > install.sh
chmod 755 install.sh
git add -A
git commit -am "Initial commit."
```

Congrats, you now have a version controlled dotfiles 🎉.

You'll want to be able to push changes to it so that on a new machine you can clone the repo and
start using it. I'd really recommend creating a *public* repo. You'll likely end up sharing your
dotfiles with others or asking questions about a particular script. Having a private repo closes a
lot of doors. You don't want to put secrets in your dotfiles, and having an open source repo removes
that possibility altogether.

```sh
➜ gh repo create
? What would you like to do?  [Use arrows to move, type to filter]
  Create a new repository on GitHub from scratch
  Create a new repository on GitHub from a template repository
> Push an existing local repository to GitHub
```

Don't have `gh`? This is something you can make sure you always have with a dotfiles repo 😎. Push
to GitHub however you like, and then we'll chat about what using a dotfiles looks like:

# bootstrap your dotfiles

The advice I'll give is based on how I use my own dotfiles repo: <a target="_blank"
href="https://github.com/collinvandyck/dotfiles">github.com/collinvandyck/dotfiles</a>. Feel free to
dig around. It may seem like a lot, but it's not -- it's a lot of little things that just grew over
time, like yours will.

When you created your dotfiles, you added an `install.sh` script in the root that just echos to
stdout. Aside from editing the files in your dotfiles, this will be the main way you interact with
your dotfiles. It will bring your machine to the desired end state -- your custom development
environment. It takes no arguments. You just run it.

```sh
./install.sh
Starting .dotfiles install
```

The first thing we're going to do is to edit the install script to follow some bash norms:

```sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash

set -e # fail on error
set -u # error on undefined variables

echo "Starting .dotfiles install"
```

Without `-e` bash will happily keep going whenever an error happens. We want to [fail
fast](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fail-fast_system) so that we don't continue when a command that
subsequent ones depend on has failed. As you hit failures you will need to program around them, and
handle the errors, depending on the context. This will make your dotfiles more relisient and will make
you a better programmer.

The `-u` option has a similar effect, failing the script if you try to dereference variables (e.g.
`$MY_URL`) when the variable `MY_URL` does not exist.

Commit your changes and push them. Years from now I'd suggest using something like
[lazygit](https://github.com/jesseduffield/lazygit) to walk through your changes over time. It's
good to see your progression in this way. `lazygit` is a wonderful tool. Why don't we add it to your
dotfiles so you have it forever?

# maintain your dotfiles

Let's make our first change and add `lazygit` to your dotfiles. Starting out, keep it simple. Just
append to `install.sh`. You'll know when it's time to break things up, but doing so right now is
counterproductive.

I'm on a mac so I'll be using the homebrew package manager. Add the following to your `install.sh`:

```sh
# If brew does not exist on this system, install it.
if ! command -v brew >/dev/null; then
    echo "Installing homebrew"
    # from: https://brew.sh/
    /bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
fi
```

Instead of just running the command to install brew every time, we first check to see if it's installed.
If you're not familiar with the `if` conditional, `command -v brew` outputs the path of the
`brew` command, or errors out. But what about the `set -e` we added earlier? If you are testing for
the success of the command, as we are, an error will not fail, but will result in a `true` for our
if statement because of the `!` negation.

Run `./install.sh`. If you didn't have homebrew, you will now. Run it again, and it should not
install it a second time. Commit and push. This is the kind of granular micro commit strategy that
really works well for dotfiles.

And now, it's time to install `lazygit`. Add this to your `install.sh`:

```sh
# update homebrew
brew update --quiet
# a sorted list of packages to install
brew install --quiet --formula \
    lazygit \
    ;
```

We use the `\` syntax to break up a command into multiple lines. The goal here is to have each
package live on its own line. This list will grow over time (I have about 70) and having one package
per line means it's easy to sort, and having a sorted package list is much easier to maintain.

Go ahead and run `./install.sh` again. It should install lazygit. If it didn't, fix the error.
Once you're done, commit and push. Again, small, focused commits.

> having small focused commits makes it easier to roll back changes.

If you have a huge commit that touches many files, it gets more difficult to back out changes. And a
dotfiles is in the business of making things easier.

At this point, just maintaining a set of installed and up to date homebrew packages on
your machine and any new machine or vm that you may have in the future is a lovely dotfiles. If
that's all you want, that's totally fine, and you can be happy with something like this. But if you
push a little bit more the rewards get bigger.

# linking configs

`lazygit`, and many other utilities, have their own config which lives in a separate file. Unlike
many other utilities, `lazygit` on MacOS stores its config in `~/Library/Application Support/lazygit`
instead of `~/.config/lazygit` which makes it a bit harder to access on the command line. Let's make it easy.

What we will do is maintain the config for `lazygit` within our repo and then *symlink* that config
into the above path. `lazygit` does not care that it's a symlink. Then we can just make config
changes locally in our repo and it's automatically reflected via the symlink. You can, and should,
use this pattern when possible for all of the tools you install in your dotfiles.

First, create the config file in a `lazygit` folder in the root of your dotfiles:

```sh
cd ~/.dotfiles    # nice
mdkir -p lazygit  # use -p so that it doesn't error out if it already exists.
cd lazygit
touch config.yml
```

A nice minimal config you can put in config.yml is:

```yaml
git:
  commit:
    autoWrapCommitMessages: true
    autoWrapWidth: 80
```

Save the `config.yml` and then append the following to `install.sh`:

```sh
# create config dir if it does not already exist
mkdir -p ~/Library/Application\ Support/lazygit

# link lazygit config
ln -s -f ~/.dotfiles/lazygit/config.yml ~/Library/Application\ Support/lazygit/config.yml
```

Run `./install.sh`. Fix any bugs caught by using `set -e`. Commit and push.

The `-f` option to `ln` tells it to overwrite the link if it already exists. If you didn't have this,
`ln` would crash your script when running `install.sh` at some point in the future. Idempotency
is king when it comes to dotfiles install scripts.

Congrats, you now have a version controlled lazygit config. You can just go into your dotfiles and
edit the config there instead of trying to remember where the config lives, because you took care of
that complexity in your dotfiles. And if you run `lazygit` now, it will read that config.

# next steps

We've only touched the very surface, but this is a legitimate dotfiles that is all yours
and only needs bash to run. It's easy to add to, as there's only one file. You'll add more
organization when you need to.

As you add to this you'll probably also want to consider:

* adding your `git` config to your dotfiles.
* configuration shell init: linking your `.zshrc` and friends in the same way we did for `lazygit`.
* being able to run `install.sh` on different operating systems, gracefully.
* configuring your PATH in your dotfiles to include a dotfiles folder in which you'll add helper
  scripts over time.

The last one there is a lot of fun. In my dotfiles, I have a
[~/.dotfiles/bin/](https://github.com/collinvandyck/dotfiles/tree/main/bin) folder where all of my
little helpers go. My dotfiles adds this folder to the PATH so they are always on hand. I use these
programs all of the time :) Maybe a good idea for a followup blog post..

As you continue to use your dotfiles, you'll add more and more to it. And eventually, someone will
ask you where you went to wizarding school.

Go forth and dotfiles!
